# Class 02 exercises

This class will present you with several exercises on epidemiological measurements, *odds-ratio*, and *relative risk* calculations.

## 1. Basic measurements

Wizards are studying the rate of developing [dragon pox](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Dragon_Pox). The wizards enroll 500 teenager participants who have been determined to not have dragon pox. The wizards plan to follow these participants over one year to see who develops dragon pox, beginning on January 1st. Participants are monitored for pox marks and greenish tint at the end of each month, to determine if dragon pox developed. After one year, 23 of the participants had developed dragon pox. Eight participants had dragon pox diagnosed at the end of April, 11 at the end of July, and four at the end of December.

1. What type of epidemiological study can this be considered?
2. How many person-**months** did the study participants contribute to the study, assuming that patients became cases of dragon pox on an unknown day of the month when they were diagnosed?
3. What is the **incidence rate** of dragon pox cases in this study?
4. In this study, when was each participant removed from the denominator of the rate?
5. What is the **comulative incidence** of dragon pox in this study?
6. What was the **prevelence** of dragon pox in the end of February, June and December?
7. Draw a plot that illustrates the appearance of new dragon pox cases along the studied time period.
8. (BONUS!) Write a small, generic, function that calculates the *Incidence Rate* from any number of cases and a vector of contributed participant time.


## 2. Case-control studies

1. Wizzards conduct a case-control study of [Scrofungulus](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Scrofungulus), using incident cases. The wizzards find out that 90% of the cases were frequent *Gillywater* drinkers. Should the wizzards conclude that *Gillywater* increases the risk of developing *Scrofungulus*?
2. Hogwarts' headmistress conducted a case-control study of [Umbridge-itis](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Umbridge-itis). The study included 100 cases and 100 controls. Of the cases, 80% had reportedly been to *Weasleys' Wizard Wheezes*. Among the controls, 50% had reportedly been to *Weasleys' Wizard Wheezes*. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.1. Prepare a 2x2 table with these data

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.2. Calculate the exposure odds ratio

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.3. Interpret the exposure odds ratio in a sentence


## 3. Risk & Odds Ratio

1. Consider Table 1 and Table 2, with hypothetical goblin populations.

####Table 1

<table>
<tr>
<td><!-- --></td>
<th scope="col">Disease</th>
<th scope="col">No Disease</th>
<th scope="col">Total</th>
<th scope="col">Risk</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tfoot class="noBold" id="Table2by2">
<tr>
<th scope="row">Total</th>
<td>180</td>
<td>9,820</td>
<td>10,000</td>
<td><!-- --></td>
</tr>
</tfoot>
<tbody class="noBold" id="Table2by2">
<tr>
<th scope="row">Exposed</th>
<td>a = 100</td>
<td>b = 1,900</td>
<td>2,000</td>
<td>5.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th scope="row">Not Exposed</th>
<td>c = 80</td>
<td>d = 7,920</td>
<td>8,000</td>
<td>1.0%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</br>
</br>

#### Table 2

<table>
<tr>
<td><!-- --></td>
<th scope="col">Disease</th>
<th scope="col">No Disease</th>
<th scope="col">Total</th>
<th scope="col">Risk</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tfoot class="noBold" id="Table2by2">
<tr>
<th scope="row">Total</th>
<td>540</td>
<td>9,460</td>
<td>10,000</td>
<td><!-- --></td>
</tr>
</tfoot>
<tbody class="noBold" id="Table2by2">
<tr>
<th scope="row">Exposed</th>
<td>a = 300</td>
<td>b = 1,700</td>
<td>2,000</td>
<td>5.0%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<th scope="row">Not Exposed</th>
<td>c = 240</td>
<td>d = 7,760</td>
<td>8,000</td>
<td>1.0%</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.1. Make graphical representations of both tables in the way you deem best

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.2. Calculate the Risk Ratio for both tables

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.3. Calculate the Odds Ratio for both tables

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.4. What happened to the difference between these values when the disease became more common?


Adapted from [CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/csels/dsepd/ss1978/lesson3/section5.html)

