# Class 03 exercises

This class will present you with several exercises on case-control and follow up studies.

## 1. Case-control studies

* Researchers conduct a case-control to look for an association between skin rashes and the use of lab latex gloves. Data gathered for this study can be found in [this file](gloves.csv).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a)Plot the data of interest however you best see fit

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b)Prepare a 2x2 table with these data

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c)Calculate the exposure odds ratio

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c<sub>2</sub>)Calculate it's 95% confidence interval

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d)Interpret the exposure odds ratio in a sentence


## 2. Follow-up studies

* Researchers conducting a prospective cohort study to assess whether or not there is an association between being a wet-lab worker who uses pipettes daily and suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome (a hand/arm nerve condition) are designing cohort choice.
* The "exposed" group is comprised of wet-lab technicians from a research center. Which of the following groups would be the preferred choice for comparison as “unexposed”?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) A group of grad students, who use pipettes in lab-work for their thesis;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) Another group of wet-lab technicians at a different research center, who do not use pipettes daily;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) Another group of wet-lab technicians at the same research center, who do not use pipettes daily;

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) A group of office workers, who frequently suffer of the same condition due to prolonged keyboard/mouse use;

* Who should be excluded from the cohort (not included in the study)?

* A total of 200 exposed and 200 unexposed participants are enrolled and followed for 10 years. A total of 19 exposed and 12 unexposed participants had the outcome of interest over the follow-up period (It's a really large research center).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) Plot the data however you best deem fit.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) What is the risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome among the exposed?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) What is the risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome among the unexposed?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) What is the risk ratio for developing carpal tunnel syndrome?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e) Calculate the Risk Ratio 95% confidence interval.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;f) What is the Risk Difference for developing carpal tunnel syndrome?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;g) Calculate the Risk Difference 95% confidence interval.

---

* Researchers conduct a prospective cohort study of the association between getting a PhD and depression. A total of 4000 adults are followed for 5 years. Of these, 2000 were PhD candidates, while 2000 had a low-stress academic job (I'm not sure this exists, but for the sake of the exercise, assume it's like taking a PhD, but less stressful). Every participant was monitored for depression every 6 months. A total of 200 incident cases of depression were diagnosed in the PhD candidates' group while the incidence of depression among the low-stress academic job group was 90. Assume all cases of depression were diagnosed at the end of semester 5.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) Construct a 2x2 table from the provided information

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) Calculate the Incidence Rate<sub>*E*</sub>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) Calculate the Incidence Rate<sub>*Ē*</sub>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) Complete the 2x2 table with *Person Year at risk* information

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e) Calculate the Rate Ratio (RaR)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;f) Provide the 95% CI for RaR

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;g) Can you plot this data?
