# Class 04 exercises

For this class, some exercises on Cross-sectional, Ecological and Randomized Control Trial studies are provided.

## 1. Cross-sectional study

* Which of the following health outcomes could be studied using a cross-sectional study design?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among adults in the European Union in 2012

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among all patients seen at a particular health clinic on one day in 2014

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) The number of new cases of HIV/AIDS diagnosed among at risk adults in the European Union in 2013

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) The number of people in a population with HIV/AIDS who are depressed and the number of people in a population with HIV/AIDS who are not depressed, in the European Union in 2015

---

## 2. Ecological study

* Researchers study the community of one town in Poland over a 10 year period. They conduct an ecologic study and collect data on the rate of automobile accidents each year among teenagers and the percentage of teens in the town who reported to have astigmatism each year. Based on their data, the researchers conclude that teenagers who reported suffering from astigmatism are more likely to be in a car accident. Which of the following are true about the researchers’ conclusion?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) The researchers’ conclusion is valid

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) The researchers have incorrectly used group-level data to draw conclusions about individual teenagers

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) The researchers do not know if the teens involved in car accidents are the same teens who have reported astigmatism, therefore, their conclusion is not valid

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) The researchers’ conclusion does not account for what other factors, if any, are related to astigmatism and being in a car accident

* Reported cases of measles are higher in city A than city B. Vaccination rates for measles are lower in city A than city B. Which of the following are reasons why would it be incorrect to simply assume that higher vaccination in city B is what is causing city B to have fewer reported cases of measles?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) City A and city B may have different strains of measles

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) City A and city B may have different proportions of people in their populations who are especially vulnerable to measles

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) City A and city B may have differences in health care accessibility, leading to differences in testing for and diagnosing of measles

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) City A and city B may have different climates, leading to differences in how/where people come into contact with each other. This may affect measles transmission rates

---

## Randomized Control Trials

### 1. The Preventive Effect of the Nordic Hamstring Exercise on Hamstring Injuries in Amateur Soccer Players: A Randomized Controlled Trial

Consider data from [this paper](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0363546515574057)

* Gather the data on number of outcomes and exposures from the paper and:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) Test whether the difference in outcome is significant between the experimental and the control group
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) Calculate the Risk Ratio, and Odds Ratio of suffering injuries between the intervention and the control group
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) Are your results compatible with those from the study? If not, why not?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) What is this study's fragility index?

---

### 2. A Randomized Controlled Trial of Caries Prevention in Dental Practice

Consider data from [this paper](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0022034517702330)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) Is the treatment effective in preventing caries in small children?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) Replicate the analyses for this outcome.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) Is your analysis compatible with that of the original paper?
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) What is this study's fragility index?

---

### I dare you...

Not for the faint of heart - Try the same, but for [this paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7723445/) instead!

**This is not a mandatory assignment**

---

* Exercises 1 and 2 inspired by [Eric notebooks](https://sph.unc.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/112/2015/07/nciph_ERIC9.pdf)
