# Class 05 exercises

Here are some exercises on confounding. Enjoy!

## 1. Healthy eating

* A small country has started a healthy eating campaign in some of its regions, to educate parents about the importance of a healthy diet for their children. After a few years, campaign results are analysed. Children living in regions where the campaign was broadcast are 1/3 as likely to be overweight when compared with children who live in regions without access to the campaign. However, looking only within regions with campaign broadcasts, researchers find that children of families with incomes above poverty level are 1/2 as likely to be overweight when compared with children of families with incomes below the poverty level. Considering this, which of the following can be considered true?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a)Family income is likely a confounder

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b)Family income is likely an effect measure modifier

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c)The healthy eating campaign appears to be effective

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d)The healthy eating campaign is the study outcome

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e)The healthy eating campaign is the study exposure

---

## 2. Case-control study

* A Case-Control study was devised in order to understand whether regular group sports practice could be associated to having Athlete's foot. Each subject was screened for group sports practice, gender and age. You can find the data [here](https://stuntspt.gitlab.io/FE2021/classes/exercises/foot.csv).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a) What is the Crude Odds Ratio between the exposed and unexposed subjects?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b) Is there any evidence of EMM due to gender?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c) What is the adjusted Odds Ratio for age strata?

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d) What is the adjusted Odds Ratio for both putative confounders?

